.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" For author, copyright, and license information, see the end of
.\" this file.
.\"
.\" This is a -mdoc format man page.  See the mdoc man page for details.
.\"
.Dd August 26, 2003
.Dt NETPLUGD 8
.Os Linux 2.6
.\"
.\"
.Sh NAME
.Nm netplugd
.Nd network cable hotplug management daemon
.\"
.\"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm netplugd
.Op Fl FP
.Op Fl c Ar config_file
.Op Fl i Ar interface_pattern
.Op Fl p Ar pid_file
.\"
.\"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a daemon that responds to network link events from the Linux
kernel, such as a network interface losing or acquiring a carrier
signal.
.\"
.Pp
When an Ethernet-style network interface on a host is plugged into a
powered-up switch, hub, or other host, the two use a carrier signal to
establish that the link is alive.  The Linux kernel makes this
information available through its
.Xr netlink 7
interface.
.\"
.Pp
The
.Nm
daemon listens for carrier detection and loss messages from the
kernel's
.Xr netlink 7
subsystem.  When a carrier signal is detected on an interface, it runs
a script to bring the interface up.  When carrier is lost,
.Nm
runs a script to bring the interface down.
.\"
.Nm
does not define any policies for how to manage interfaces; it leaves
that to a script,
.Pa /etc/netplug.d/netplug ,
which is described in
.Sx FILES
below.
.\"
.Pp
You tell
.Nm
which interfaces it should manage by giving it a list of shell-style
glob patterns, which it matches against using the
.Xr fnmatch 3
function.  For example, a pattern of
.Pa eth[13]
will tell
.Nm
to only manage
.Pa eth1
and
.Pa eth3 ,
if those interfaces exist.  If the interfaces are not known to the
kernel at the time you start
.Nm ,
perhaps because they are unplugged PCMCIA network interfaces or
devices whose drivers have not yet been installed,
.Nm
will start to manage them as soon as they are plugged in or their
drivers are available.
.\"
.\"
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.\"
.It Fl F
Run in the foreground; do not detach and run as a daemon.  Messages
are logged to
.Pa stdout
or
.Pa stderr ,
instead of using the
.Xr syslog 3
mechanism.  This option is useful mainly for debugging your
configuration.
.\"
.It Fl P
Prevent autoprobing for interfaces.  The
.Nm
daemon normally probes for all possible interface names that might
match the patterns you tell it to manage.  This is necessary in order
to get network driver modules (the default with almost all Linux
distributions) loaded and set up, so that they can provide link status
notifications to the
.Nm
daemon.  Autoprobing should always be safe, and doesn't take long.
Disable it with caution.
.\"
.It Fl c Ar config_file
Specify the name of a file from which to read patterns that describe
the interfaces to manage.  You can provide this option multiple times to read
from more than one file.  If you do not provide this option at all,
.Nm
will attempt to read from a default config file.  If you do not want
.Nm
to try to read from any real config files, you can specify
.Pa /dev/null
as a config file.
.\"
.It Fl i Ar interface_pattern
Specify a pattern that will be used to match interface names that
.Nm
should manage.  You can provide this option multiple times to specify
multiple patterns.
.\"
.It Fl p Ar pid_file
Write the daemon's process ID to the file
.Ar pid_file .
If you tell
.Nm
to run in the foreground, this option is ignored.
.El
.\"
.\"
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /etc/netplug/netplugd.conf
Default config file to read, if none is specified on the command line.
The config file format is one pattern per line, with white space,
empty lines, and comments starting with a
.Li #
character ignored.  Patterns are standard shell-style glob patterns,
e.g. "eth[0-9]".
.\"
.It Pa /etc/netplug.d/netplug
The "policy" program (typically a shell script) that
.Nm
uses to probe for interfaces, and to bring them up or down in response
to network link events.  This program is called with the name of the
interface as its first argument, and one of the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It in
A cable was plugged in, or carrier came up.  The command should bring
the interface up.  The command is run asynchronously, and it should
exit with status 0 on success.
.It out
A cable was plugged out, or carrier went down.  The command should
bring the interface down.  The command is run asynchronously, and it should
exit with status 0 on success.
.It probe
The command should load and initialise the driver for this interface,
if possible, and bring the interface into the "up" state, so that it
can generate
.Xr netlink 7
events.  The command is run synchronously; it must exit with status
code 0 if it succeeds, otherwise with a non-zero exit code or signal.
.El
.It Pa /etc/rc.d/init.d/netplugd
The
.Xr init 8
script that starts, stops, and displays status of the
.Nm
daemon.
.El
.\"
.\"
.Sh AUTHOR
.Nm
was written by
.An Bryan O'Sullivan
.Ad <bos@serpentine.com> .
.\"
.\"
.Sh COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE
Copyright 2003 PathScale, Inc.
Copyright 2003, 2004, 2005 Bryan O'Sullivan
.\"
.Pp
.Nm
is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the
terms of the GNU General Public License, version 2, as published by
the Free Software Foundation.  You are forbidden from redistributing
or modifying it under the terms of any other license, including other
versions of the GNU General Public License.
.\"
.Pp
.Nm
is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
for more details.
.\"
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cardmgr 5 ,
.Xr hotplug 8 ,
.Xr ip 8 ,
.Xr netlink 7
